Added ZIP support spec (#1717)
microsoft/winget-cli: doc/specs/#140 - ZIP Support.md

---
author: Alexis Bekhdadi @midoriiro
created on: 2021-11-16
last updated: 2021-11-16
issue id: 140
---

# Spec Title

For [#140](https://github.com/microsoft/winget-cli/issues/140)

## Abstract

This feature adds to winget-cli the ability to install application delivered through a ZIP archive.

## Inspiration

A bunch of applications are only provided by developer's through a ZIP archive. There are three cases:

> 1) The archive contain only one binary that need do to be extracted and add to PATH env var

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1) The archive contains only one binary (a portable / standalone executable).
```

> 2) The archive contain an installer that need to be executed and let do his job

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) The archive contains only one supported installer (msix, msi, or exe).
```

> 3) The archive contain a complex hierarchy that need do to be extracted and add specific folder to PATH env var

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3) The archive contains more than one file,
```

Reviewer 2: The cases I see:
1. Archive is the set of files that should be placed on the system (both your 1 and 3)
2. Archive is a container for the installer, and is itself temporary (your 2)
3. [New] Archive is basically both of the above; the files themselves need to be kept, but there is some registration step that is needed.

## Solution Design

> A new installation flow need to be created to execute different installation strategies regarding these three cases above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new installation flow needs to be created to execute different installation strategies regarding these three cases above.
```

First thing first, the archive need to be extracted in a specific path (TEMP folder can be a good candidate).

Regarding case 1, installation flow check if TEMP folder contain a single binary and repack it

> into an MSI package (including setting PATH env var). Then, MSI installation flow can take control.

Reviewer: Packaging a standalone / portable application is an interesting approach. I'm not sure we had considered this specific approach. We may prefer the concept of repackaging as an MSIX as that is the latest technology, but there may be different concerns to discuss here.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that writing code to transform the archive into an installable type is better than simply writing the code to manage archives directly.  All of the proposals require unpacking the archive, which is itself the primary step in management.  Afterward, adding to the `%PATH%` is fairly straightforward and the issues are more about lifetime management.  Injecting our own ARP entry is largely sufficient to achieve that.

Author: @denelon I'm not an expert concerning Windows packaging application. The main idea of this specification is to package the content of a zip file (except for case 2) in order to let winget managing the lifecycle of the new package. 

I saw Windows SDK offers a set of CLI command to create MSIX package, but that mean installing Windows SDK.

@JohnMcPMS  I don't know what is ARP, but if I understood your suggestion. How you do you handle uninstall/upgrade of the package ? That the goal of an ARP entry ?

Reviewer: Add Remove Programs (ARP) is where many of the entries for programs installed on Windows 10 and Windows 11 get recorded. We use that metadata for the list command and as the source for values we used to correlate with manifests in configured sources. We don't necessarily need to create an "insaller" per se'. It's possible to just write entries to ARP (now part of Apps & Features). The Windows Package Manager could act as an "installer" proxy to create the entries and modify the path environment variable. We're looking at pros and cons to several approaches.

Author: I see, it's make sense. I looked if an API exist about managing an ARP entry, but I did found nothing. If winget-cli already manage that kind of tasks, @JohnMcPMS made a good point.

I don't know what is the state of art about ARP in Windows 10/11 now. But, ten years ago I wrote an application that find all installed applications on the system through the registry, the main goal was to uninstall silently a batch of applications. That was tricky to handle all the cases. 

If an API already exist, the repacking solution would not be the best approach(in my opinion) as you explained both of you.

I'll try to find some documentation on the internet and this repository to study how to manage an ARP entry.

Reviewer 2: I don't think that there are APIs; we certainly do not use them and I looked for them when we implemented reading.  It is basically a registry data contract.

Author: Yes, I saw that yesterday. I updated the spec. There some points to discuss about it but, especially where to install the zip content. The ARP section seem good for you ?

Reviewer 3: Perhaps we treat ZIP installs the same way visual studio code is installed (i.e. user installer) within the AppData folder.

Author: That I suggested in the last revision of the spec. For user scope, application will be installed in AppData/Local/myapplication. But maybe there is a better location for user scope ? 

In any ways, scope and location can be overrides by users when calling winget install. Just found that, that should be take in consideration on the specification.

Regarding case 2, installation flow check if TEMP folder contain an installer (.exe, .msi, .msix) and pass control
to MSI/Other installation flow.

Regarding case 3, installation flow check if TEMP folder does not contain an installer nor a single binary.
This case is the complex one, example with 'vagrant' hierarchy:
- root
  - bin 
    - vagrant.exe
    - other.exe
  - embedded
    - bin
    - some other folders

> This hierarchy can be packed into an MSI installer, but how can we specify which binary to add 

Reviewer: This use case is why packaging an MSIX may be better than an MSI, but we will need to dig a bit deeper here.

Reviewer 4: MSIX packaging client side is impossible right now due to the signing requirements, no? Right now, you either have to sign in with Azure AD to get a short lived (48 hours?) cert, or buy a longer one.

in PATH env var (in that case bin/vagrant.exe)?

> Take a look into the following manifest examples (v1.1.0)

Reviewer: We should stick with only supporting this in the 1.1.0 or later schema.

> ### Case 1|2 YAML manifest

Reviewer 2: I would argue for case 2 to be the one that includes a relative path to the installer, in the event that there are support files included within the archive.

Author: Case 2 expect to have an installer at the root archive. But if the installer is located to 'archive.zip/somefolder/installer.exe' that should be a new case in my opinion. To avoid having more case I suggest to add a new attribute like BinaryPath.

```
PackageIdentifier: Editor.App
PackageVersion: 1.0
MinimumOSVersion: 10.0.0.0
InstallerType: zip
Scope: ...
InstallModes: ...
InstallerSwitches:
  Silent: ...
  SilentWithProgress: ...
UpgradeBehavior: install
Installers:
- Architecture: x64
  InstallerUrl: https://editor.com/app/1.0.zip
  InstallerSha256: ...
ManifestType: installer
ManifestVersion: 1.0.0
```

This is compliant with the actual schema v1.1.0

### Case 3 YAML manifest

```
PackageIdentifier: Editor.App
PackageVersion: 1.0
MinimumOSVersion: 10.0.0.0
InstallerType: zip
Scope: ...
InstallModes: ...
InstallerSwitches:
  Silent: ...
  SilentWithProgress: ...
UpgradeBehavior: install
Installers:
- Architecture: x64
  InstallerUrl: https://editor.com/app/1.0.zip
  InstallerSha256: ...

>   BinaryPath: bin/binary.exe

Reviewer 2: If this is intended to be the `%PATH%` update location, it should be to a directory and not a file.  The default would be either be no `%PATH%` update or the root.

Author: Yes, I noticed my mistake before your write your comment ^^".  You are right, BinaryPath should be a relative path from the root archive.

ManifestType: installer
ManifestVersion: 1.0.0
```

> This is not compliant with the actual schema v1.1.0. We need to specify which binary to add into

Reviewer: If we need additional metadata, this would be a newer schema than 1.1.0. Once we sufficiently capture all the use cases, we can certainly look at extending the schema. The clients lacking support for the 1.1.0 or later schema must be able to determine this is not going to be a valid scenario, so the .zip would not be a supported installer type on those clients.

Reviewer 2: Currently you would get an `ERROR_NOT_SUPPORTED` result.  If you think that isn't a good experience, we should come up with a better one and implement now to increase the chances of the downlevel client having it.

PATH env var. Therefore, schema need to be updated to take knowledge of that information.

> ### Repack ZIP into MSI package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Repack uncompressed files into a supported package format
```

This section need more specifications. There are many tool to repack an MSI package, some expansive and
some apparently free (Advanced Installer ?).

## UI/UX Design

> One downside of this feature is the MSI repackaging will be executed on client side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One downside of this feature is the package will be built on the client side.
```

> Which mean for each installation the same process will be executed and remain the same for an 

Reviewer: This will certainly have performance implications. We also need to ensure rational versioning so the upgrade flow also works as expected.

Author: You mean that information (like version, name, etc) from the winget manifest should be linked to built MSI(X) package ?

application x.y.z.

> But with a proper MSI repacking solution, this operation should be transparent to the end-user.

Reviewer: We would likely have some output for the user with the packaging step so they at least get an indication of progress.

## Capabilities

### Accessibility

This should have no direct impact on accessibility.

### Security

> No direct impact on security.

Reviewer: There would most certainly be security implications. We may even need a SHA256 hash for each of the files to be packaged. We don't want to be in a state where the files are downloaded and modified prior to the packaging steps. This will also have a substantial impact on the validation flow so we can verify the hashes are valid at validation time, and correctly included in the manifest for any changes to the manifest.

Author: That could be tricky to add all checksum for all files in the manifest. If the ZIP archive is validated can we just lock the extracted files before packaging to prevent any modifications by other process ?

### Reliability

This is not expected to impact reliability.

### Compatibility

> No code breaking, reuse existing code and add code to support zip installation.

Reviewer: This would not be a backward compatible behavior. Only clients with the support for this feature would be able to install packages of this type. We would need to add something like "zip" to the enumeration of installer types. The initial implementation would also be an experimental feature until we have covered enough of the different use cases to confirm viability of the solution.

Author: Yes, you are right. For the moment this draft is only intended to schema 1.1.0. Like i suggested, we maybe need to update the schema (1.1.1?) to handle case 3 and other new cases.

> ### Performance, Power, and Efficiency

Reviewer: Building the installer is likely to take additional time and resources on the client. There will be performance considerations here with the client in the packaging phase.

> ## Potential Issues

Reviewer: MSIX packages are typically signed. There would likely be security issues related to signing. If the MSI route or some other mechanism is used for the package, we would also need to look at those considerations. Even if we just move the standalone / portable application (or set of files) to a directory path, any changes to those files could have unintended consequences. Some packages also generate additional files in their directories so those may need to be considered during an upgrade or uninstall flow.

Reviewer 4: > if we just move the standalone / portable application (or set of files) to a directory path, any changes to those files could have unintended consequences. 

which is true of any package winget currently installs, as with admin rights (or for user scoped packages, normal rights) I can go mess around with anything the installer created. I think that might be a separate issue.

Author: Like someone said on issue #140, if a file is modified is not the packager responsibility but it's an user fault. If files are created by a process delivered by the package, these files should be referenced somewhere to prevent overwriting them, or rather we can specify to overwrite theses files during an upgrade. Typically for config files, user need to edit them, that could be a problem if on each upgrade these files are overwritten. 

Concerning signing a MSIX package, A self-signed package could be acceptable ?

> ## Future considerations

Reviewer: Other compression formats may also need to be considered in the future. The initial implementation is likely to be limited to .zip files.

in PATH env var (in that case bin/vagrant.exe)?

This specification take on consideration schema on version 1.1.0. 
A schema update should be necessary to take all the cases in consideration. 

Take a look into the following manifest examples

### Case 1|2 YAML manifest

```
PackageIdentifier: Editor.App
PackageVersion: 1.0
MinimumOSVersion: 10.0.0.0
InstallerType: zip
Scope: ...
InstallModes: ...
InstallerSwitches:
  Silent: ...
  SilentWithProgress: ...
UpgradeBehavior: install
Installers:
- Architecture: x64
  InstallerUrl: https://editor.com/app/1.0.zip
  InstallerSha256: ...
ManifestType: installer
ManifestVersion: 1.0.0
```

This is compliant with the actual schema v1.1.0

### Case 2.1 YAML manifest

If the archive contains an installer but not located at root folder (e.g. archive.zip/somefolder/installer.exe)

```
PackageIdentifier: Editor.App
PackageVersion: 1.0
MinimumOSVersion: 10.0.0.0
InstallerType: zip
Scope: ...
InstallModes: ...
InstallerSwitches:
  Silent: ...
  SilentWithProgress: ...
UpgradeBehavior: install
Installers:
- Architecture: x64
  InstallerUrl: https://editor.com/app/1.0.zip
  InstallerSha256: ...

>   InstallerPath: somefolder/installer.exe

Reviewer 5: I think we may also need a key defining the secondary installer type.

It is likely that some of the exe’s shipped inside zip packages are actually nullsoft or inno, which should be preferred to exe since the CLI already handles their silent switches without having to define them

Author: A key definition already exist on schema [1.1.0](https://github.com/midoriiro/winget-cli/blob/03f8a555693003129e0199759135d874a580a0b5/schemas/JSON/manifests/v1.1.0/manifest.installer.1.1.0.json#L459) (line 459)

Maybe we can use it to tell which installation flow to choose?

Reviewer 5: That key, by definition, would be "zip" since the primary installer is inside of a .zip file. The issue I'm trying to get ahead of is that the zip file could contain different types of exes which have their own installation flow

Author: The key I'm pointing could be resolve that issue with something like this:

```
PackageIdentifier: Editor.App
PackageVersion: 1.0
MinimumOSVersion: 10.0.0.0
InstallerType: zip
Scope: ...
InstallModes: ...
InstallerSwitches:
  Silent: ...
  SilentWithProgress: ...
UpgradeBehavior: install
Installers:
- Architecture: x64
  InstallerUrl: https://editor.com/app/1.0.zip
  InstallerSha256: ...
  InstallerPath: somefolder/installer.exe
  InstallerType: inno # or something else
ManifestType: installer
ManifestVersion: 1.0.0
```

Reviewer 5: I don't believe that is valid. Having the key at the manifest level is not compatible with the key at the installer level. One of them will override the other.

Author: I see, which component validate the manifest and could be responsible of overriding these key ? An other component or the installation flow ?

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure I understand your question.

The overriding is an inherent property of the CLI. If a key is specified at the installer level, it is overridden by the manifest level. You can't have them defined at both levels
```
PackageIdentifier: ...
PackageVersion: ...
InstallerType: zip <----- THIS IS THE MANIFEST LEVEL
Installers:
- Architecture: ...
  InstallerUrl: ...
  InstallerSha256: ...
  InstallerType: nullsoft<----- THIS IS THE INSTALLER LEVEL
ManifestType: installer
ManifestVersion: 1.0.0
```

Author: Ok i see, that's a dead end. About the issue, can you provide a concrete example with multiple installers included in a zip archive ? That could help to better understanding and had a better overview on this issue.

Reviewer 5: I’m not saying multiple installers may be in a .Zip archive. I’m saying a manifest may have different types of installers, and a zip archive may be one of them.

For example - the 7-zip manifest has installers for both exe and msi. Both are in the same manifest.

Some publishers pubish exe’s, msi’s, and zip files, which should all be able to be in a single manifest

Author: Ok I understand now. And I agree with you about defining another key to specify the installer type. Maybe InstallerSubType ?

I need to clarify some points on the specification about previous conversations. I'll commit soon.

Reviewer: https://github.com/microsoft/winget-cli/issues/1242 is how we're planning to capture some of the "nested installer type" issues. For example, PowerToys is distributed as an .exe, but it installs as an .msi. The installer is a wrapper to help with dependencies.

Reviewer 5: Perfect, I think that as long as that issue is referenced in the spec, then there won't be an issue here

Author: That should close this issue. Thank for your feedback.

ManifestType: installer
ManifestVersion: 1.0.0
```

This is not compliant with the actual schema v1.1.0.
```InstallerPath``` attribute should be added to schema.

### Case 3 YAML manifest

```
PackageIdentifier: Editor.App
PackageVersion: 1.0
MinimumOSVersion: 10.0.0.0
InstallerType: zip
Scope: ...
InstallModes: ...
InstallerSwitches:
  Silent: ...
  SilentWithProgress: ...
UpgradeBehavior: install
Installers:
- Architecture: x64
  InstallerUrl: https://editor.com/app/1.0.zip
  InstallerSha256: ...

>   BinaryPath: bin (e.g. bin folder where vagrant.exe is located in my example)

Reviewer 5: Could this be simplified to "InstallerPath" as well, and have the cli determine if it is an installer or binary?

Author: Case 2 cover installer (.exe, .msi, etc). You're pointing case 3, which is for complex hierarchy that does not include installer, only binary with complex folders structure. The base idea is to implement all the cases. Nonetheless, "BInaryPath" maybe not a good name, any idea ?

Reviewer 5: I’m saying that for case 2, you are suggesting that a key be added to define the path to the exe/msi/etc.

Why can’t that same key be used for case 3?

Author: I got confused you was quoting case 3. On case 3, BinaryPath key is for indicate to register a path after the zip extraction into user or system environment variables (need to be defined how to). 

Correct me if I'm wrong, but from my point of view regarding case 2 (excluding my example manifest 2.1). Case 2 assuming that the zip archive only contains one file, the installer. Case 2 also assuming that the installer will set the proper environment variables if needed (specifically $PATH) or not. that depend of the nature of the application and how editors package their applications. I don't know, how do you manage that kind of thing, winget-cli is agnostic regarding this aspect ?

To answer your question, case 3 does not handle installer file. That the job of case 2 and 2.1. Case 2 does not need to define InstallerPath key because, the archive only contains the installer at the root archive. On the other hand, case 2.1 zip archive maybe not contains only one file and maybe not located at root, so InstallerPath key is needed to indicate where to find the installer after the extraction and execute it.

To summarize, BinaryPath and InstallerPath are optional keys that depend on the context and they should be set properly by the package maintainer. To avoid messing up with these settings, updating the documentation and the helper script YAMLCreate.ps1 should be needed, in my opinion. For all cases, if the manifest is miss-configured the procedure should fail in an organic way. 

I don't know if I'm clear, my english is not perfect. Maybe I should clarify these aspects on the specification.
